---
layout: post
title: RPM meter
description: A simple RPM meter based on STM32F103C8 MCU and libopencm3.
categories: Embedded
tags: MCU libopencm3
author: Sl-Alex
readall: Build a bike with me
image: 2021-09-17-rpm_meter/RpmMeterPreview.webp
--- 

I was about to mill some PCBs using my [CNC][1] machine when I realized I don't know anything 
about my spindle motor. One of the most important things for milling is RPM (revolutions per 
minute) and this was exactly what I needed. I didn't want to buy any factory-made RPM meter, 
so after thinking for about 100ms I came to the quite obvious conclusion - I want to build my 
own bike. Let's use STM32F103C8 "Blue Pill" board and libopencm3/make instead of HAL/STM32CubeIDE.



The idea is simple - we use TCRT5000 sensor for RPM pulses generation, one timer for counting 
those pulses and another one for time measurement. Periodically we take that RPM counter, filter 
it a bit and output to the LCD. As an additional useful thing for the user we will count the 
time while the spindle motor is turned on and will display it when it is turned off.
Here is a board with TCRT5000 sensor:

{% include image.html url="/assets/2021-09-17-rpm_meter/TCRT5000.webp" description="TCRT5000 sensor: small and reliable" %}
 

This sensor can detect frequencies up to 45kHz (2700000 RPM), which is far beyond any spindle motor capabilities.
One of the best LCDs for this task would be this one:

{% include image.html url="/assets/2021-09-17-rpm_meter/lcd.webp" %}

Here is how it works in real time:

{% include image.html url="/assets/2021-09-17-rpm_meter/RpmMeter.webp" %}

Here is a connection table:

| STM32 pin | Signal         | Description 
|-----------|----------------|---------------
| A12       | RPM_IN         | RPM input
| B13       | LCD_WR_CLK     | HT1621B write clock
| B14       | LCD_CS         | HT1621B chip select
| B15       | LCD_DA         | HT1621B data input

The code is [here][3], just clone the repository with libopencm3 submodule and run ```make_all.sh``` script, which will take care of the rest.

[1]: https://github.com/Sl-Alex/CNC_OpenSCAD
[2]: http://libopencm3.org/
[3]: https://github.com/Sl-Alex/RpmMeter
